## Nits

Originally Written: June 2, 2024

I launch this project with a few goals:
1. Demonstrate an ability to build a functional software system
1. Demonstrate domain knowledge adjacent to software systems (e.g. data science, systems design)
1. Serve as an organizational tool


### The Road So Far

While admittedly this project is still in its infancy, one of its goals is to demonstrate domain knowledge, and one way of doing that is through documentation.  These dev diaries are written for a (hypothetical) audience who would be interested in that demonstration, a (very real) audience of my future self who will want to remember key details, and a (very real) audience of my current self who wants to organize and commit thoughts to make progress.

Python is my coding language of choice both in terms of syntax and availability of useful libraries and help resources.  I have chosen to use [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) rather than some competing options (notably Django and Flask) because FastAPI seems to be considerably more lightweight, which allows me to get started on the more interesting things sooner.  FastAPI also allows the use of the features I most liked in Django, including Jinja templating syntax.

I am not currently interested in implementing a user authentication scheme.  This is predominantly because:
* As a user, I'm fatigued by how many accounts I have
* As a relatively inexperienced developer, I do not want to accept the responsibility of password storage

The first commit to this repository shows a basic use of OAuth (Google) Authentication.

### Next Steps

The most obvious missing components at this time are Javascript and persistent storage, and I will address them in that order.

#### Javascript

While I have limited experience in "vanilla" Javascript, I feel it will be an interesting exercise to use a more common framework.  That said, I simply do not have much information to allow me to differentiate between frameworks.

There are a truly staggering number of choices, and I've seen more than one "tierlist" attempting to rank them (with notably inconsistent rankings).  Based on the 2022 data for [The State of Javascript](https://2022.stateofjs.com/en-US/libraries/front-end-frameworks/) survey it seems React is the most commonly used (at 82%), handily beating out Anglar (49%), and Vue.js (46%) while no other framework exceeding 25% usage.  

Of the three frameworks previously mentioned here, 51% of developers expressed an interest in learning Vue.js, 47% expressed an interest in learning React, and 20% expressed an interest in learning Angular.  These represent the 4th, 5th, and 10th most "interesting" languages in the survey.  While this data suggests that an experienced Javascript developer learning a new framework may choose Svelte, Qwik, or Solid, this simply does not reflect my current experience.

I will work with the React framework due to what appears to be a dominating market position, and what I hope to be an abundance of resources as a result.

#### Persistent Storage

This is one area where I'm tempted to prematurely optimize.  In particular, when I consider scalable approaches I'm tempted to default to NoSQL databases.  That said, the reality is that this project is incredibly unlikely to scale beyond the performance limits of a vertically scaled SQL server.

While I plan to abstract this from the user (to make refactors easier should the need arise) my current plan is to use Amazon Aurora PostreSQL offered through Amazon RDS.  Using a dedicated cloud provider for persistent storage this way helps ensure data is more accessible despite what are sure to be a number of application-level changes.
