## Databases and Complexity

Originally Written: June 5, 2024

In the last entry I outlined two clear areas for advancement: Javascript and persistent storage.  I decided to tackle the latter first.

In the last entry I mentioned that I planned to use Amazon Aurora PostgreSQL.  I can now confirm that I have gotten at least basic functionality using Aurora to work, and that this was the wrong place to start.

**Please note** - As I explain below I'm currently midway through refactoring the code I've written to interact with the database.  Expect to see functions and files move and change names in future releases.

### What Went Wrong?

The most important mistake I made was not considering Aurora scaling and costs.  AWS designs for applications that can scale upwards quickly, but it doesn't always make sense in the earliest stages of a project.  For example, the "Serverless" configuration requires a minimum of two "Aurora Capacity Units (ACU)", and at this time those two ACUs (in Northern Virginia, using Aurora Serverless v2) would cost over $175 per month.  Suffice it to say this capacity well exceeds what I currently need and these costs currently exceeds the budget for this project.

### What Did I Learn?

First, estimate costs before writing cloud providers a blank check and hoping for the best.  Additionally, setting up budget alerts with those cloud providers is a necessary insurance policy.

However, there are also software design lessons here.  As I want to reduce costs, something about my code (currently configured to connect to AWS Aurora) will need to change.  Broadly speaking, the code I wrote serves a few major functions:
1. Obtaining credentials via AWS Secrets Manager
1. Connecting to a (remote) PostgreSQL server
1. Running queries against a PostgreSQL server

Clearly the first function is specific to AWS.  Similarly, the code I wrote for the third function can be structured in such a way that it has just about no idea that the PostgreSQL server is located in AWS.  Because I structured my code this way (largely to apply the DRY principle) I will have a much easier time refactoring the first (and arguably the second) functions to user a lower-cost SQL solution.

In other words: some mistakes can and should be avoided, but our choices in design will determine how easily we can respond if and when things change.

### What's Next?

If the location of the PostgreSQL server (and any data already on the server) is irrelevant for a particular piece of code, I'll want to minimize cost as I build out those components.  Lower-cost alternatives to using AWS Aurora Serverless include:
* Running a PostgreSQL image in Docker locally (No additional costs)
* Running PostgreSQL on an EC2 instance, likely using Terraform to facilitate reproducibility for rapidly deployed and destroyed environments (Minimal additional costs)
* Using a lower-cost RDS offering (for example Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL on db.t4g.micro in a single AZ for $11.68 per month)

Part of the appeal for using AWS immediately for development was data persistence.  For example, if I added an entry on Monday, it'd still be there on Friday.  This is comparatively unlikely in a Docker-based framework.  

However, this is a bit of a misunderstanding of what is important in this scenario.  I do not currently require that data be available at all times, nor do I require that it persits (e.g. for auditability).  I simply want it to be *available* on Friday (if that is when I want to continue my work).  A lower cost and slightly more involved workaround to reach the same effect is to build in a mechanism for establishing a database with a given state on demand (either by restoring from a backup or by systematically adding some data).  I plan to chase these ideas a bit further to see where they lead.
