## Exploring Structure

Originally Written: June 7, 2024

In the last entry I talked about unexpectedly high costs from using Amazon RDS, and how I needed to adapt to use different tools (at least for now).

### Using Docker

Docker allows running containerized applications.  This means a lot of things, but for present purposes the most important aspects are that (at this time) I can deploy a functional SQL server by typing `docker-compose up -d`.  While (currently) this creates a new server each time, the cost of creating and demolishing that server is so small I hardly care.

It's worth noting that this Docker framework also has other advantages that may be interesting later.  For example, we could deploy additional images (like Redis) and any work we do with containers can be easily transferred to different/cloud hardware.  This is not an exhuastive list of benefits of containerization, either.  For example, Kubernetes is fascinating, but several steps down the road.

One interesting feature (and headache) I discovered in this work is that `compose.yaml` can read from a local `.env` file, which is attractive for folks publishing to public GitHub repositories.  However, it seems to me this requires a more strict naming pattern than the methods I use to incorporate these files into Python.

### Architecture and Interfaces

Of course, writing code that allows me to use Docker is not a good reason to delete code that allowed me to use Amazon RDS, as the project may very well find a use for RDS down the line.  So how can we structure code that can access a Postgres database when that database may be hosted either on the cloud or in a local Docker container?

There are several approaches, but I want to minimize the amount of changes in code necessary.  Using code like the following, all I have to do is change one variable!

```python
# Determine where the data source is defined
DATABASE_LOC = "docker"

# If running postgres on Aurora
if DATABASE_LOC == "Aurora":
    from app.aws_utils.aurora import (AWS_RDS_ENDPOINT as HOST,
                                      POSTGRES_DB as DATABASE,
                                      POSTGRES_USER as USER,
                                      POSTGRES_PASSWORD as PASSWORD)

# If running postgres in Docker/locally
if DATABASE_LOC == "docker":
    from app.docker_utils.docker_postgres import (POSTGRES_HOST as HOST,
                                                  POSTGRES_DB as DATABASE,
                                                  POSTGRES_USER as USER,
                                                  POSTGRES_PASSWORD as PASSWORD)
```

If we focused on Docker first, this may seem a bit silly.  After all, I don't need imports (or  really any code) to tell me `HOST` is localhost.  However this type of parallel structure is pretty neat for cases where determining `HOST` may be more complicated (like reading from a modifiable configuration file, as in the Aurora example).

There are further benefits visible in fields like `PASSWORD`.  In the initial work with Aurora I never knew the password - I delegated that responsibility (and the responsibility of rotating that password) to AWS.  To retrieve that information for use here I had to run several API calls to AWS (in `app/aws_utils/aurora.py`).  By abstracting obtaining that information from *using* that information each file represents a division of responsibility and components can change independently.

As a last comment, while it *is* a bit silly in some sense to treat the Docker parameters this way, this allows me to read from the same source `.env` file that `compose.yaml` uses, which prevents me from (for example) updating the password required by my local postgres instance without updaing the password provided to my local postgres application by my application.  Having a single "source of truth" has its advantages.
